





TH1:

  Mouse:
    Left: 
          Select a pad;
          If the pad was selected already and a TH1 exsits, add a marker on curse postion;
    
    Shift(hold) + Left: 
          Select a pad;
          If the pad was selected already and a TH1 exsits, copy the selected histogram and draw in a new canvas;
          






Keyboard shortcuts:

  ?      Open shortcut help
  g      Gaussian fit / 2D gate from markers
  b      Show background
  B      Toggle background
  s      Show peaks
  x/y    Project 2D histogram onto X/Y
  p      Project selected marked range
  w/q    Rebin / unbin by 2
  m      Remove markers
  o      Unzoom axes
  z/l    Toggle log scale




Interactive ROI Tool

The ROI tool lets users define a region of interest on a 1D histogram. Place two markers on the histogram, then press `r` to create an ROI between those marker positions.

When an ROI is created, the selected x-range is shaded on the histogram and a short summary is printed:

  created ROI_0 [xlow, xhigh] counts=...

The `counts` value is the sum of all bin contents inside the ROI. In physics terms, this is the total number of detected events in that selected region. If the ROI surrounds a peak, this is the gross peak area, including both signal and background.

Press `R` to remove all ROIs from the current histogram.

ROIs automatically update their shaded range when the histogram is rebinned or unbinned.




==Energy Calibration Protocol==

1. Measure a known calibration source.

   Use a source with well-known gamma-ray energies, such as Co-60,
   Cs-137, Na-22, Ba-133, or Eu-152.

2. Open the uncalibrated spectrum.

   Start Groot and load the spectrum in channel space.

3. Find the calibration peaks.

   Use peak labels or manual fitting to identify the channel position
   of each known gamma-ray peak.

   Example Co-60 lines:
     1173.2 keV
     1332.5 keV

4. Create a calibrator and load the source's decay radiation.

   In Groot, run:

     GDecayNucleus co60("60Co");
     GCalibrator cal;
     cal.AddData(GrabHist(), co60);

   For quick interactive use, the same automatic calibration pass can be
   started when the calibrator is created:

     GCalibrator cal(GrabHist, "60Co");

   By default AddData finds candidate spectrum peaks, matches them to source
   lines, fits the matched peaks, adds accepted channel-to-energy points, and
   runs a linear calibration fit. Inspect the result with:

     cal.Print()

   To only find candidate peaks without matching or fitting, pass false as
   the third argument:

     cal.AddData(GrabHist(), co60, false);

   You can also add or correct accepted channel-to-energy matches explicitly:

     cal.AddPeak(429.8, 1173.228, "Co60");
     cal.AddPeak(488.6, 1332.492, "Co60");

5. Fit the calibration.

   Use order 1 for a linear calibration:

     E = C0 + C1 * channel

   Use order 2 for a quadratic calibration:

     E = C0 + C1 * channel + C2 * channel^2

   Example quadratic command:

     cal.Fit(2)

6. Check calibration residuals.

   Print the accepted points and residuals:

     cal.Print()

   The residual plot shows:

     fitted_energy - known_energy

   A good calibration should have residuals close to zero with no clear
   curved trend. If the residuals are poor, check the peak assignments or
   try a different calibration order.

7. Apply the calibration to a copy of the spectrum.

     TH1D* calibrated = cal.ApplyCalibration(GrabHist());
     calibrated->Draw();

8. Verify the calibrated spectrum.

   The new calibrated histogram has energy-valued bin edges while the source
   histogram remains unchanged.

   Known peaks should now appear near their expected energies.

9. Save and reuse the .cal file.

   The .cal file stores:

     C0
     C1
     C2
     fit order, fit quality, and reference source

   Reuse this file for spectra measured with the same detector setup and
   acquisition conditions.
